Now
by 1937, do you pretty well have your career staked
out as it was going to exist until 1940? Were you
moving into new fields or pretty well remaining on
the California coast? Well, we were gradually
sort of expanding our our area of interest, we'd
started working really off the coast of Southern
California. And in 1940, we did make a cruise as far
north as roughly the Columbia River. And another
venture that was in 1939 was a cruise to the Gulf of
California, which we made in the winter of that
year, which was the first time that any vessel from
Scripps had really ventured very far away from
home. And this was really sort of exploring in
those days because so little was known. And I don't
know what might have happened if the war had not
intervened. And I think that we would have had to
find some larger vessel, and that we would have,
presumably within a few years at least, have moved
out to operations on sort of an ocean-wide scale.
But
actually,
I left Scripps in July of 1941, having spent a month
prior to that at Woods Hole to learn something
about the interpretation of bathy thermograph
observations in terms of underwater sound
problems. And on July the 1st, I moved down to the
Navy laboratory on Point Loma, which not as an
employee of the Navy, but under one of these war
research programs
was funded later on by the NDRC, the National
Defense Research Committee, I think it was
called. And this was a essentially federally
funded war research program administered
through the University of California. And I
stated in this program at Point Loma until early in
1946.
By that time, the work had been taken over by the
Navy itself, but I still continued, as did many of
the others there, to be actually as employed by the
University of California. And during the first
year or so down there, the work was primarily, that
I was engaged in, was primarily how you might
interpret various physical conditions in the
ocean, primarily temperature and salinity and so
on, in terms of the acoustic conditions in the
ocean, what we used to call the echo-ranging
problem, and this gradually gave way to some other
environmentally related problems. But I became
more and more involved in general sort of
administration
of some of the basic research going on at the
laboratory on Point Loma. And toward the end, I
actually was an assistant director in charge of
the research, which involved primarily a set of
acoustics of various kinds, but a good many other
types of activities. I have several questions on
that. Now, you go to Woods Hole, though, to work
with the BT for anti-submarine warfare, don't
you? I did go back and work with Robert Montgomery
for about a month, because at that time, as I
indicated earlier, we really didn't know what the
bathy thermograph was measuring and so on, and
also how you might be able to use this kind of
information in these underwater sound problems.
And we were all very naive as to what we were doing.
But I contributed my small part here to the whole
program in that I was the one who suggested they
make photographic copies. And Montgomery and I
worked out the first sort of system coding these
things and keeping the appropriate records and so
on, which has persisted for a good many years after
that. Right. You're looking for ways of measuring
thermal claims. In effect, yes. There had been
some work done by Columbus Island at Woods Hole by
Morris Ewing and some of the other people that were
associated with them in the preceding few years,
which showed the probable relationship of
temperature and humidity conditions on
Underwater Sound. Morris Ewing's contribution,
I think, was particularly to show that you could
use some of the refraction computations that he
was familiar with from his work in geophysics
would be applied to these conditions in the ocean.
And of course, it was not directly temperature and
salinity that was involved here, but rather the
distribution of sound velocity. And so there were
We had the clue as to what we should be doing,
although a lot of the sort of techniques had not
been worked out. particularly during the first
year or so, much effort went into devising ways of
calculating these so-called ray diagrams and
seeing how you could, in a sense, simplify some of
the conditions as you observed in the ocean to
compute these sort of ray diagrams
and so on.
Then a lot of effort was spent in the first year or
two of making up what were called sound ranging
charts or sonar charts, which didn't depend just
on the BT. We used every scrap of information we
could to essentially try and come up with some semi
quantitative approach of the regional
differences in sound ranging conditions that
might be predicted from known characteristics of
the ocean waters. Why photography? I'm sorry? Why
photography? What made you think of photography?
Oh, I guess because my father was a photographer
and it seemed to me that the BT slide was like a
negative, why not put it in a projector and just
make a print from this, which could then be
enlarged too, because the original BT slide you
really had to insert in a magnifier in order to read
it, we more or less standardized on what was
roughly a postcard size reproduction. All you
have to do is stick them in a regular photographic
enlarging machine and use fairly contrasty
paper.
When you're working, I need to know something else
here, too, right now. Why didn't you go with Revell
to the Navy and to Washington at this time? Why did
you choose Point Loma? Well, here again, there's
some kind of interesting things that, if I
remember correctly, about 1939, there was some
concern about the international situation and so
on. Revelle had applied for and obtained a reserve
commission as an ensign and I applied too. I think
it was somewhat later than that because Yes, must
have been. I have somewhere in my files a letter
that I received from the Navy saying that they
regretted they couldn't offer me a commission
because they had no foreseeable need for
oceanographers.
Of course, Revelle went down to Point Loma at that
same time, and I just, I can't really remember how
long he was there, but he was there for about a year
or two before he went back to Washington. But I had
tried that route, but it didn't work. And
I think that answers it, sure. And then during
those war years, then you're involved in research
at Point Loma itself. Yes, I would, as I look back on
it now, I did a good deal of
research, particularly in the first year or two,
but really what I became more and more involved in
was what I would consider a science
administration. things moved very rapidly in
those days and so there was a great deal of sort of
planning and and a good deal of traveling involved
in that that under the NDRC where there were
several centers were work of this kind was going
on, and they served as a sort of coordinating
function, and so we met at what seemed like fairly
frequent intervals for discussions of what we
were doing, what we were finding, what we ought to
do, and also in trying to prepare sort of manuals
and documents of various kinds for the Navy. So
this is part of what I sort of consider as the
administrative side. We weren't involved, I
wasn't involved too much with actual sort of
budgeting or matters of that kind, but it didn't,
What it didn't involve was us breaking out from the
rather narrow kind of confines of individual
research and getting involved with the programs
and activities of a variety, a relatively large
number of people in fields that I had absolutely no
familiarity with at all. And this, I think, was one
of the effects of the war, that those of us who were
involved in activities of this kind really got
broken away from what would have been a normal sort
of pattern of
career evolution here. and got thrust into very
large, very complex kind of problems involving
fields which were originally at least unfamiliar
to us. That anticipates, as a matter of fact, my
next question. With whom did you come into contact
in about 1941 to 1943 that sort of moves you into
administrative oceanography here all at once?
Well, Professor Sverdrup was originally to
essentially head up the the kind of oceanographic
component at the Point Loma laboratory, but he
encountered security problems because of having
his family, not his immediate family, but
relatives in Norway and so on, and it was felt that
he was in a sensitive set of positions, so they
would not give him security clearance and I
essentially had to take over what he had might have
done and he returned and he never really left it
because this was only a part-time sort of activity
down Point Loma but he returned so full-time to to
Scripps, and he and Walter Monk, whom we had
originally had down at Point Loma with us, and who
could not get security clearance. Sverdrup and
Monk took on this study of the wave problem, and I
think it started originally under the Air Force's
support. And out of that there's this whole
amazingly rapid development of understanding of
the problems of wave characteristics, wind wave
characteristics, and methods of predicting wind
wave conditions and swell and surf and so on. And
then out of that activity came the
training program which was set up at Scripps,
which I had no direct contact at all, although I was
living within a few miles of it, which brought in a
number of young officers from the Air Force and the
Navy who were trained in these wave forecasting
techniques. And as we were saying this morning,
later on, a number of these young men returned to
Scripps and finished off their doctoral work. But
that was really one of the, I think, very dramatic
set of developments during the war, because prior
to the time that Sverdrup and Munk turned their
attention to this problem, which they had not
really dealt with previously, there was
virtually nothing known about the
characteristics of ocean waves. It was a body of
theory, but very little connection between the
sort of theory and the real conditions. And there
was only a very, very limited literature about
wave conditions and wave behavior.
Did you consciously make an effort at about 45 to go
to Washington or to DC, or did that just happen?
Well, here again I think Ravel enters the story
because he had moved from the Navy laboratory at
Point Loma to the Bureau of Ships and in particular
to the, I think it was called the sonar design
section or something to that name under a I can't
remember his rank now, but Bennett, and had the
imagination to see the role and importance of
ocean information to the Navy, and yet there was no
mechanism by which the Navy could essentially
continue the oceanographic studies and so on and
other. there are a number of sort of related
threads to the story which are involved in this
thing, and that is that, as I mentioned earlier, at
Woods Hole and at Point Loma, we prepared, for
example, these sonar charts and so on, they were
actually published through the Hydrographic
Office. And so that during the war, they had set up
in the Hydrographic Office an oceanographic
unit, I believe it was called at that time. And this
was under the direction of Mary Sears, who was
being commissioned as a wave. And they served
during the war. as essentially a publications
outlet for some of the material being prepared
under these war research laboratory programs,
and they did some compilation of various kinds of
information, but this was a temporary sort of
situation. And one of the things that Revell and
others were able to accomplish was to have the Navy
Department set up on a continuing basis an
oceanographic section in what was then the
Hydrographic Office. And I was essentially
offered the position, and it looked extremely
interesting and important to me at that time to go
back and start what was known when I arrived as the
Division of Oceanography in the Hydrographic
Office. Of course, the whole thing later became
the Oceanographic Office, but it was a division.
Shortly after I arrived, in April of 1946, the
oceanographic unit that had been in existence was
being phased out, and the new division reached a
low ebb of one girl who helped me and myself. I left
about five years later with over 200 people in the
division and operating two sort of what were at
that time very large oceanographic vessels for
the Hydrographic Office. So this was, yes, a
challenging sort of thing. I felt that there were
urgent needs to keep a sort of a national program
going rather than letting things die, as they
might have at the end of the war. And
I think this was Turned out to be quite correct.
What sort of people did you look for when you went to
establish this office? Did you already have some
people in mind whom you wished to bring to
Washington? Well, only a few people that I'd known
for one reason or another and seemed desirable and
seemed appropriate for the job.
people that really were brought in as to be my
principal assistants were Clifford Barnes, who
you'll probably talk to next week, But he only
spent a relatively short time with us and then
returned to the University of Washington. John
Lyman, who you may have encountered, who had been
in the Navy all during the war as a reserve officer
and had been at Scripps before that. Thomas
Austin, who's now head of the National Data
Center, and young man who'd been at the WAVE
program at Scripps during the war, Charles Bates,
who's now chief scientist for the Coast Guard. So
those were the, in a sense, senior people who came
in early in the game, but what was, it's,
I think interesting looking back that far, which
is just over 30 years ago, that at that time there
was no classification in the civil service for
anybody called an oceanographer. So one of my
first sort of jobs back there was to set up the job
descriptions for oceanographers, get them
approved by the the Civil Service Commission and
then began to try and recruit some people. And I
very soon found that there weren't very many
people to be recruited. And as any administrator,
I abhor as a job vacancy why we were in the position
of having to hire people with degrees in physics or
chemistry or geology and so on. with essentially
no experience whatsoever in oceanographic
problems. And I soon realized, as I'd learned
during the war, that there was a real need for some
kind of program to train people or educate people
in the field. And so, as I sometimes remark, I
decided to get out of the hiring business and get
into the manufacturing business. opportunity to
come to the University of Washington looked
attractive to me. Not only was it sort of
intellectually attractive, but I thought there
was a very real sort of need here. Now, there was
some graduate programs available in the early
years following the war, but One of the things that
really stimulated me into coming to the
University of Washington was the opportunity to
set up an undergraduate program in oceanography,
which had never been attempted before. I want to
return to your trip to Washington, because that's
extremely important to us. I have several
questions, though, right here concerning your
activities in DC itself rather than Washington
state. Was there much conflict between these
civilian oceanographers and Navy personnel when
you began to establish this office? Well, I
wouldn't say there was any conflict. We were
looked on as a set of screwballs by the
establishment within the Hydrographic Office.
They didn't know quite thought we were or who we
were or anything else. And so we were allowed
really a considerable amount of sort of freedom
simply because they had no prior experience in
this area. And this
period, and I can't identify it specifically by
year, but the military budgets were being cut back
very severely in the late 40s, and along with them
the Hydrographic Office was being cut back by
major amounts,
and yet the oceanographic program continued to
grow, and this of course was looked on with some
sort of favor and encouragement here, but I think
they realized that there was something to be done
here. Now, the people who are sort of particularly
important and encouraging and supporting the
growth of the Oceanographic Program were not so
much within the office itself, but in the Office of
the Chief of Naval Operations, people concerned
with anti-submarine warfare and pro-submarine
warfare and so on, the operating forces. And it was
largely through their interest that we got the
support and opportunities we did. What about ONR?
Well, ONR, I have to stop and think here again. That
got started when, about 46? 46. It's not really
called ONR then, but Revell begins to think about
ONR in 46. Yes, it was the Office of, what was it
called, something rather off, or Something and
Invention. Yeah, right. It's a strange title.
Yes, and it must have got established about that
time, and Revelle then moved from the
Bureau of Ships to the newly established And, of
course, the establishment of ONR was, in a sense, a
response to the phasing out of these wartime
research activities under NDRC and the parent
organization, which was OSRD, Office of
Scientific Research and Development, I guess it
was. So the Navy was, in a sense, trying to find some
mechanism to keep some of their programs going. We
worked very sort of closely together, although I
cannot remember that there were ever any sort of
transfer of funds or anything as one might
anticipate in more recent times. But I actually
spent almost a year of it, and it must have been
about 1949-50, I spent the better part of a year
actually in ONR on loan, in a sense, from the
Hydrographic Office to work on planning and so
forth as related to anti-submarine problems. And
so there was a good sort of, I think, there was no
conflict there as I ran into some sort of
difficulties that you'd almost anticipate
anywhere, but I had really very good rapport, I
think, with the people in the Hydrographic
Office, and CNO, and ONR, and Bureau of Ships, and
so on. So, no, I don't feel there was any
antagonism, certainly there was a difference in
perspectives on a lot of the problems. I went back
to Washington with the idea that we ought to be
doing a lot of work on the Arctic, and this had
seemed to me a good sort of subject in which we knew
very little and that we ought to be doing some work
up there and And here's where we got into
lack of appreciation on the part of the
particularly CNO who informed me and my boss, the
hydrographer, in no uncertain terms that the Navy
had no plans to operate in the Arctic and therefore
had no reason to want to spend any money trying to
find out about it. So one of the things I was able to
do, in part with assistance from ONR and some
others, was to in effect bootleg some, get some
work started in the Arctic.